.TH COGENI-LUA 7 "February 2026" "0.1.0" "cogeni Manual"
.SH NAME
cogeni-lua \- Lua API reference and patterns for cogeni
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBcogeni\fR environment provides a suite of modules designed for AST-driven code generation.
.SH GLOBAL VARIABLES
.TP
.B _CURRENT_FILE
Absolute path to the currently executing Lua script.
.TP
.B _FILE_EXTENSION
Extension of the currently executing script (including the dot).
.SH GLOBAL FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B write(id, content)
Buffers text for a specific output block. By default, targets \fB<generated id="ID">\fR in the current file.
.TP
.B async(fn, ...)
Starts a new asynchronous task (coroutine). Returns a job handle.
.TP
.B await(job_handle)
Pauses the current task until the specified job completes.
.TP
.B sleep(seconds)
Asynchronously pauses the task for the given duration. Must be used with \fBawait\fR.
.SH MODULES
.SS cogeni
.TP
.B read_ast(path|handle, lang)
Parses source into an AST table. If \fIpath\fR is relative, it resolves against \fB_CURRENT_FILE\fR. Automatically waits for files being updated by other tasks.
.TP
.B process(path)
Triggers the full generation cycle on another file. Enables recursive orchestration.
.TP
.B get_grammar(ext)
Resolves grammar name from extension using the system configuration.
.TP
.B register_grammar(name, url, opts)
Registers a custom grammar source for the current session.
.TP
.B outfile(id, path)
Redirects \fBwrite(id, ...)\fR to overwrite the \fBentire file\fR at \fIpath\fR.
.TP
.B outtag(id, path, tag)
Redirects \fBwrite(id, ...)\fR to a specific \fItag\fR in \fIpath\fR.
.SS fs
.TP
.B find(dir, opts)
Recursively finds files. \fIopts\fR is a table: \fB{ type = "f"|"d", name = "glob", maxdepth = N }\fR.
.TP
.B basedir(path), basename(path), join(...)
Standard path utilities (directory name, file name, and joining).
.SS jq / json
.TP
.B jq.query(val, query)
Executes a JQ query against any Lua value (usually an AST table). Returns a single value or a table of values.
.TP
.B json.encode(val), json.decode(str)
Standard JSON serialization.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS 1. Basic Generation
.nf
# <cogeni>
#   write("hello", "print('hello world')")
# </cogeni>
# <generated by="cogeni" id="hello">
# </cogeni>
.fi
.SS 2. Multi-file Orchestration
.nf
-- cogeni.lua
local files = fs.find(".", { type = "f", name = "*.py" })
for path, _ in pairs(files) do
    async(cogeni.process, path)
end
.fi
.SH AST TABLE SCHEMA
Every node in the AST is a table:
.TP
.B type
Grammar-defined node name (e.g., "identifier").
.TP
.B fields
Map of named children (e.g., \fBast.fields.name\fR).
.TP
.B children
Ordered list of all sub-nodes.
.TP
.B content
Raw source text (typically only for leaf nodes).
.TP
.B start_pos, end_pos
Coordinate pairs \fB{row, col}\fR.
.SH BEST PRACTICES
.IP \(bu 2
\fBPath Resolution\fR: Always use \fBfs.join(fs.basedir(_CURRENT_FILE), ...)\fR for relative paths.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBConcurrency\fR: Use \fBasync\fR for I/O bound tasks like \fBcogeni.process\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cogeni (1)
